---
title: ""
date: 2015-12-30T00:00:00+00:00
description: ""
tags: 
---
As we approach 2016 there seem to be endless discussions about
"blockchain". It's a term that is ever-more frequently cited in even
mainstream journalism, while in the fintech space alone there are a slew
of would-be suppliers and would-be users claiming that "blockchain"
will revolutionize any number of applications. This now-common usage
suggests it must be something precisely defined and well understood, but
this seems to be more a matter of mantra than comprehension.

The echo chambers of the Internet reverberate to many opinions, but
attempts to find a precise meaning seem to find a dismaying lack of
agreement. To be anything more than marketing hyperbole we really need
the answers some questions. What is it? What isn't it? What might it
be? Can it be something that will allow us to build new and enduring
systems? In short, what is the essence of blockchain?

![The Menai Bridge, Bangor, North Wales, UK](./MenaiBridge.jpg)

*Image: The Menai Suspension Bridge, Bangor, North Wales, UK, completed
in 1826 (almost 190 years ago), demonstrates how blocks and chains can
create something quite remarkable and enduring (photograph taken by the
author).*

## The Satoshi whitepaper

Almost every discussion of blockchains starts with the Satoshi
whitepaper, but it is this very foundation that starts us on a path to
confusion. Neither the terms "blockchain" or "block chain" appear
there; there are 67 uses of "block" and "27" of chain, but 0 of
"block chain" or "blockchain". This aside though, let's see where
this origin leads us.

The whitepaper is short; it's just 9 page long. The first mention of
"block" and "chain" starts at the bottom of page 2, section 3, where
there is a discussion of a basic timestamp server. Prior to this the
whitepaper describes a series of design goals associated with the
Bitcoin design such as the ability to allow two parties to transact
without needing to trust a third party.

The statement of the design goals are fundamentally important. They set
the scene for an implementation to meet those goals in which
characteristics are layered upon each other, but it is informative to
look at what each new layer does. In our quest for the nature of a
blockchain we need to be careful to look for things that are its
attributes, rather than characteristics of this first implementation.

### Transactions

Section 1 of the whitepaper is an introduction and it is with section 2
that we see anything really substantive. Section 2 sets a scene for a
digital coin, but it is described as being a chain of transactions in
which the "coin" is assigned to new owners. The coin is really a
metaphor for a transaction history of linked transactions.

Interestingly, section 2 also describes how a centralized system
doesn't actually need to do this.

### Blocks and chains

With section 3 we see the essence of the design pattern that might best
describe the basis of a blockchain. It is given as something that is
constructed from a series of incremental blocks of data, each of which
can be identified by a cryptographic hash over its contents. In
addition, each block incorporates the cryptographic hash of its
predecessor block to ensure the construction of a chain. The block
hashes are published as a form of widely witnessed evidence that
demonstrate shows the existence of both the block data and the
predecessor hash. Changing either the predecessor or the other data
within the block would result in a different hash signatuare for the
block that would not match the widely witnessed view.

These characteristics are all fundamental, and without them we cannot
construct anything interesting. What is equally interesting though is
what is not stated as necessary at this point. There are no mentions of
coins, no mentions of peer-to-peer networks, no mentions of mining, etc.
Instead the suggestion is that publishing hashes in any widely
disseminated form would be sufficient, with the 2 examples being given
as publication in a newspaper or publication via Usenet.

While we see some explicit characteristics these lead to a few implicit
ones:

-   Publication of the hashes is meaningless unless those same hashes
    can be independently recomputed by an external observer who is given
    just the data from the blocks in the chain. It is this
    characteristic that enables the observers to not have to trust the
    originator of the chain of blocks; instead they are able to compare
    historical hashes for themselves.
-   Recomputing of the hashes requires that the algorithm by which the
    blocks is produced be deterministic and well specified. Without
    these our external observer cannot recompute the hashes.

### Enabling peer-to-peer operations

The next section, 4, of the whitepaper talks about proof-of-work. The
first line is interesting: "To implement a distributed timestamp server
on a peer-to-peer (P2P) basis, we will need to use a proof-of-work
system similar to Adam Back's Hashcash". Proof-of-work is not required
to construct a blockchain, just to enable the peer-to-peer
implementation of the timestamp server. Subsequent cryptocurrency
designs have shown there are potentially other approaches that can be
taken here too (e.g. forms of proof-of-stake, or hybrids of both), but
if we are happy with a client-server approach then none of these are
actually necessary.

This is not to say that proof-of-work might not have some other uses
with a blockchain design, but none seem fundamental to our quest.

### Network and beyond

Section 5 describes the implementation characteristics of the Bitcoin
network. Nothing here explicitly extends the concept of what a
blockchain is, or might require. Indeed, neither sections 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11 or 12 (the final section) go on to explicitly offer any new ideas
about what a blockchain might be.

## Answers to our questions

If the Satoshi whitepaper is the origin of the blockchain design we're
left with a rather thin definition, but perhaps that is the most
enlightening aspect. It is very explicit about particular design choices
and their purpose, which tends to lead towards a realization that many
of the claims about "blockchains" may actually be a matter of
implementation rather than architecture.

Let's ask some specific questions then!

### Must a blockchain have coins?

There is an interesting discussion in the whitepaper about the need to
provide incentives to those providing security to the P2P network to
remain honest and as a means to introduce "coins" into the system, but
the discussion is clearly in the context of the P2P network. The concept
of coins themselves is noted as unnecessary with a trusted "mint".

A trusted mint is not something desirable in a cryptocurrency, but there
seems to be no requirement for coins if we wish to construct a chain of
cryptographically-linked blocks. There is an interesting question to ask
about trust but we will return to that later.

### Must a blockchain implement smart contracts?

From the perspective of the whitepaper this seems unlikely. The word
"contract" does not appear anywhere.

Might a blockchain enable smart contracts? Yes, of course it might, but
it might enable many other things too.

### Must a blockchain be programmable?

Again the answer seems to be no. Neither the words "program" or
"script" appear in the whitepaper.

A blockchain does have a requirement to be interpretable by one or more
indepdendent observers, so it is clearly built from one or more
well-defined data structures. The block data structure must contain a
previous block hash, and the cryptographic hash of the block must be
performed in a very specific way, but none of these require that the
data structure carry any notion of executable code.

Can a blockchain contain some form of program code? This is an
implementation question and the answer is yes. Bitcoin includes a
limited scripting language, and other systems, such as Ethereum, have
subsequently attempted to support more elaborate programming models. The
choice to support such concepts seems more to be either expedience, or,
more ambitious design goals, but it seems a blockchain need no more be
"programmable" than any other linked list data structure.

### Is a blockchain a database?

Once more the answer seems to be no. As before, the word "database"
does not appear in the whitepaper.

At its core a blockchain is a special type of data structure. The blocks
within the chain contain data, but this does not make it a database; at
best the blocks represent the transaction log of a specific database
implementation. Similarly there are no semantics for querying a
blockchain, any more than there are for querying a linked list. A
specific implementation might allow for queries of either but the
implementation does not define the thing itself.

As a point of comparison, the IP packets that for the TCP packets
carrying this article are defined as data structures in a series of IETF
(Internet Engineering Task Force) RFC (Request For Comments) documents.
The documents describe the form of the packets and their behaviour when
they are transported. Recipients of those packets are able to make their
own determinations of their validity without regard to any part of the
network implementation between them and the originator. An
implementation of a router/firewall may offer a feature to capture those
packets so that they can be analyzed later, and may offer database
queries of those packets, but there is nothing in the nature of an IP
packet that makes it a database, nor is there anything in the RFCs that
would suggest otherwise. Implementation features and specification are
very different things.

[Is A Blockchain
Trustless?]{style="color: inherit; font-family: inherit; font-size: 14px; font-weight: bold;"}

The answer here is no too, but that's because the question is too
broad. A blockchain does allow us to require less trust than many
traditional systems but any implementation still requires some level of
trust.

A recipient of block data must trust that it has been delivered without
being compromised by some intermediary. The P2P distribution of blocks
within the Bitcoin and similar networks set out to try to minimize trust
in peers, but even this model has potential failure points. Here are a
few:

- We trust that the blockchain software that we are running has not
  been compromised to deliver falsified data.
- We trust that the operating system under which our blockchain
  software is running has not been compromised to deliver falsified
  data.
- We trust that the network processors providing connectivity to our
  system have not been compromised to deliver falsified data.

"In code we trust" makes for an interesting mantra, but 30+ years of
malware, spyware, etc., informs us that this is a highly debatable
strategy.

A blockchain design does make falsifications harder for an adversary,
and makes accidental errors dramatically less likely. We are able to
"trust but verify" (within bounds), but this is still a significant
improvement over blindly trusting. Most importantly, none of these trust
minimizing characteristics are aspects of the P2P network design, but
are instead intrinsic to the block encoding.

### Must a blockchain be non-permissioned or can it be permission-less?

A blockchain is just a data structure so really the question makes no
sense. Who has the ability to read or write a data structure is a
totally different question.

Let's ignore this subtle distinction for a moment, though, and act as
if the question might make sense. Consider the case of Bitcoin; who
writes the blockchain? The answer is that miners (or more precisely,
block makers such a mining pool operators, not those who just hash
blocks) get to write new blocks. Transactors on the network can provide
candidate transactions to be included in blocks, but this does not
guarantee blocks will ever contain those transactions. With Bitcoin we
talk about this being "non-permissioned" because no-one needs any
explicit permission to become a block maker.

If we consider other potential uses of a blockchain design, though,
there are a often very well defined set of participants who we would
wish to be able to write block data. In many cases this may even be one
single participant. A critique levelled at such potential uses of a
blockchain are that this makes it no better than a database, but a
conventional database is something in which blind trust must be placed.
Its internal state is generally unknowable. Even in its simplest uses a
blockchain can at least provide a means to verify the state of such a
system, and to do so in a way that enables histories to be validated.
This is only the start of the possibilities, however!

### Is a blockchain the Internet of money (or the Internet of anything else)?

Realistically, no, or at least not on its own.

When we looked at "not a database" we also touched on why this claim
doesn't really make sense. Superficially the argument seems seductive.
The thought is that we can build lots of technology on top of a
blockchain in the way that a network stack is layered.

There are many problems with this proposition, but the obvious one is
that a blockchain is just a data structure. It makes a good candidate
for being used to convey information across the Internet but doesn't
enable anything in and of itself. Separating the blockchain from any
transport of a blockchain, however, does give some hope that blockchains
may enable more reliable financial applications over the Internet. A
clear separation also allows experimentation at each layer of the system
design and this is a key characteristic that has enabled the Internet to
be so successful. With the Internet, candidates for all layers of the
network stack are able to be trialled, replaced or modified, allowing
the best designs to win. Similarly the standards-based approach has
enabled disparate implementations to work together without preventing
commercial advantages from being sought and monetized.

In the case of blockchains we have already seen that there is a
requirement to support external observers and this mandates a level of
interoperability.

## Last thoughts

We have looked at what a blockchain might or might not be, and perhaps
seen some hints of what it might enable. The technology that underpins
Bitcoin can be used to build many things, and Bitcoin's legacy should
not just be Bitcoin itself, but that is has shown the viability of
something far more fundamental. The debate over what constitutes a
blockchain won't end here, but we need to move the discussion forward
and we need to resist the urge to allow it be just another marketing
buzzword.

To make that happen we need both clear terminology, and well reasoned
usage. We need to avoid conflating many different ideas, and we need
technology claims to be realistic and achievable. If we fail then,
eventually, the term blockchain will be meaningless and have to be
replaced. This seems like the wrong outcome. If we succeed then the idea
of a blockchain will not be the end of the story. Instead it will take
its place as a layer upon which better and ever-more useful systems can
be built.
